In this lecture, you'll learn how to verify the Spanning Tree Protocol. I'm using the same network
topology that I've been using throughout the rest of the section.
So we've got the Layer 3 part of the network up at the top with our routers, R1 and R2, and going
northbound,
and then we've got the Layer 2 part of the network with our Core Distribution switches,
CD1 and CD2, and our Access Layer switches, Acc3 and Acc4. There's obviously Layer 3
connections going from the PCs up to the routers as their default gateways as well.
So what we want to do here is to map out how the Spanning Tree has been configured.
In this example, the switches have been configured with VLANs but Spanning Tree has not been
configured at all,
so they're all going to be using the default priority.
So what we want to do here is to determine which is the Root Bridge first.
Then from there, we can figure out our Root Ports.
On the other switches, our Designated Ports, and our Blocking Ports, so we can then check that Spanning
Tree has eliminated any loops in the Layer 2 part of the network,
and we can also see the tree
that traffic is going to be traveling over.
Now, the diagram above is a screenshot from Packet Tracer. I've got the link lights enabled so you can
actually see easily where the Root Bridge is, and the path that traffic is going to go over. Just from looking
at it here,
you see that both Acc3 and CD2,
their links are all green.
So, one of those two is going to be the Root Bridge, and on CD1, it's blocking a port
going towards CD2. So CD2 can't be the root bridge, it's going to be Acc3.
I can see on Acc3, all the links going to it are green on both sides.
I can also see from the diagram that the ports that are being blocked
are gigEthernet0/2 on CD1, and port fastEthernet0/21 on Acc4. So both of the possible loops, going
from CD1 to CD2, to Acc3, that has been broken by blocking gigEthernet0/2 on CD1, and the potential loop between
CD1, CD2, and Acc4 has been broken by blocking the port fastEthernet0/21 on Acc4.
Okay, so I can see all that from the diagram, but obviously, in the real-world, you're not going to have a
diagram which shows exactly how the Spanning Tree is configured.
So how do we figure out how the Spanning
Tree is laid out in a production network?
That's what we're going to cover here, using the same example topology.
So really, the Swiss army knife command for checking your Spanning Tree configuration is 'show spanning-tree'.
You already know that the default Spanning Tree version on a Cisco switch is PVST+, which runs
a separate spanning tree instance for every VLAN.
So, you also need to specify the VLAN as well.
In the example here, we're running the command first off on the Root Bridge, which was on Acc3
for our example.
So I say 'show spanning-tree vlan 1',
well, if you don't specify the VLAN, it will show you the Spanning Tree for all of your different VLANs,
and if you've got a lot of VLANs on the switch, it's going to be very long output.
So, you want to specify the particular VLAN.
The next thing you can see here is the protocol is IEEE, and it's not actually using one of the
standard IEEE Spanning Tree versions,
it's using Cisco's proprietary PVST+.
It's just a quirk of the history of how this was developed, that Cisco called PVST IEEE when you
use the 'show spanning-tree command',
so using the default PVST+ here.
Next thing to tell you about the output of the command, there are two sections the Root ID section and the Bridge ID
section.
The Root ID gives you information about the Root Bridge.
The Bridge ID section gives you information about this switch.
So the Root ID information should be similar on all of the switches in your Local Area Network.
The Bridge ID section will specify the MAC address for that individual switch.
Next thing, we're on the Root bridge here,
we can see that very clearly, under the Root ID section,
it tells us this bridge
is the Root and that's why the MAC address is the same in the Root ID section and in the Bridge ID section,
because the switch is the Root Bridge. Notice for this example,
the switch's MAC address ends in D43D.
That's important when we look at the information coming up on the next switch we'll look at, which is a
non-Root Bridge, so D43D. We can see the priority in here.
The priority is 32768, which is the default priority.
This has been elected as the root bridge,
so I can see very simply from this information that all my bridges, all my switches, must be set with
the default priority, which is 32768, and this switch was elected as the root bridge
because it's got the lowest MAC address.
The last thing to see on the output of the command is it gives you the status of all your interfaces that are connected
to other switches. Because this is the root bridge,
all our ports are going to be Designated Ports and Forwarding.
Okay next, let's look at the output on a non-Root Bridge, so that was on Acc3.
Next up, look at the output on CD1,
and from, we can see that it is the diagram we can see  it is forwarding on interfaces fastEthernet0/24 and fastEthernet0/21, and
it's blocking on interface GigEthernet0/2.
So looking at the output on CD1, I do a 'show spanning tree for vlan 1' again, I can see that
this switch is also running PVST+.
You want all the switches in your network to be running the same spanning tree version.
Again, you've got the root ID and the bridge ID section,
and because this is not the root bridge, the two MAC addresses are different now.
Again, the root ID section gives you information about the root bridge.
You want all of the switches in your network for the same VLAN to be agreeing on which switch this
is on.
We can see that it is the same, D43D.
So that looks good.
And in the bridge ID section, I can see that this switch's unique MAC address ends in 3902
This switch's MAC address starts with 0090, which is higher than the root bridge's MAC address
of 0001,
that's why the Root Bridge was preferred over this one.
Other information in the Root ID section, I can see that this switch's cost to get to the Root Bridge is 19, and
and the Root Port is interface fastEthernet0/24.
That's the least cost path interface to get to the root bridge. And down at the bottom, I can see that interface
gigEthernet0/2, its role is alternate,
so it is a Blocking Port.
It's a port that has been selected to block a potential loop. Interfaces fastEthernet0/21 and fastEthernet0/24
are designated in a Root Port, and they are both Forwarding.
Okay, so that was the CD1, we'll look at the topology diagram again.
Let's also have a look at CD2, and on CD2, all its interfaces should be forwarding so let's jump in
to the lab to see this.
I will go to my enable prompt and 'show spanning-tree for vlan 1' and in here, I can see that it
agrees that the Root Bridge is Acc3, ending with MAC address
D43D. This switch's
MAC address also begins with 0090,
so it's a higher MAC address,
that's why it was not selected as the Root Bridge.
All of my switches are running
the default priority of 32768.
For this switch to get out to the Root Bridge, it uses interface fastEthernet0/21, and
the cost is 19.
I can see all of my ports that are connected to other switches down at the bottom here, and fastEthernet0/21
again is the Root Port.
The other two ports are Designated Ports,
so all of these ports are Forwarding.
Finally, let's look at the topology diagram again.
The last switch to look at is Acc4, which is forwarding on FastEthernet0/24
That is the Root Port and it's blocking on fastEthernet0/21.
So let's jump onto Acc4 in the lab, 'show spanning-tree vlan 1'.
I can see it also agrees that the Root Bridge is Acc3.
This switch's MAC address begins with 0060, which is higher than the Root Bridge's MAC address.
All of my switches are using a priority 32768.
The Root Port is fastEthernet0/24, and the cost to get to the Root Bridge is 38.
We're forwarding on port fastEthernet0/24,
and we're blocking on port fastEthernet0/21.
So that's how you can check your Spannning Tree topology.
There's not really a quick way of doing this. If you just have a command line access to your switches,
jump on to one of your switches and do 'show spanning-tree' there. That will tell you which is the Root Bridge.
To find the entire topology and to see which ports are forwarding and which are blocking,
you really
just have to map it out
switch by switch.
So it's handy
if you use a pencil and paper for this, you can draw it down in diagram everything.
Okay, so that was the 'show spanning-tree command'.